History, Grade 7
Overview
In Grade 7 history, students will examine social, political, economic, and legal changes in Canada
between 1713 and 1850. They will explore the experiences of and challenges facing different groups,
including First Nations, Métis, and Inuit communities, in Canada during this period, and will compare
them to the experiences of present-day Canadians. In this grade, students will be introduced to the
historical inquiry process and will apply it to investigate different perspectives on issues in eighteenth-
and early-nineteenth-century Canada, including issues associated with the shift in European imperial
powers and the impact on Indigenous individuals and communities. Students will learn about various
groups that existed in colonial Canada and how they were affected by the conflicts and changes that
characterized this period. They will begin to apply the concepts of historical thinking to their study of
Canadian history, leading to deeper and more meaningful explorations of life in colonial Canada.
Students will also develop their ability to gather and critically analyse evidence from primary sources in
order to form their own conclusions about historical issues and events.
The Grade 7 history expectations provide opportunities for students to explore a number of concepts
connected to the citizenship education framework, including beliefs and values, equity, freedom,
identity, power and authority, and relationships.
The following two-part chart presents an overview of Grade 7 history, and is meant to provide a starting
point for planning instruction. For each overall expectation (listed in the first column), it identifies a
related concept (or concepts) of historical thinking and a big idea (see an explanation of big ideas and
the concepts of disciplinary thinking and definitions of the concepts of historical thinking). General
framing questions are provided for each strand to stimulate students’ curiosity and critical thinking and
to heighten the relevance of what they are studying. These broad and often open-ended questions can
be used to frame a set of expectations, a strand, or a cross-disciplinary unit. The final column suggests
ways in which spatial skills can be introduced and/or developed at this grade level, and indicates specific
expectations with which they can be used (see a description of spatial skills).
244

Strand A. Heritage and Identity: New France and British North America, 1713–
1800
Related Sample Spatial
Concepts of Skills/Activities to
Overall Expectations Big Ideas Framing Questions
Historical Be Introduced/
Thinking Developed
A1. analyse aspects of Continuity Understanding • Do we Maps* and Globes
the experiences of and Change; the experience • Analysing and
various groups and Historical experiences of any of the constructing
communities, including Perspective and same political maps to
First Nations, Métis, challenges challenges show alliances
and Inuit communities, facing people people in (see, e.g., A2.4)
in Canada between in the past Canada • Analysing
1713 and 1800, and helps put our experienced in demographic or
compare them to the experiences earlier times? population maps
lives of people in and What types of related to
present-day Canada challenges developments settlement
into context. permit us to patterns,
respond to territorial
them in expansion (see,
different ways e.g., A2.4)
than people
did in the
past?
245

A2. use the historical Historical Different • Why might • Analysing and
inquiry process to Significance; groups different constructing
investigate perspectives Historical responded in people view the flow maps on
of different groups and Perspective different ways same event in movement
communities, including to the shift in different ways? patterns
First Nations, Métis, power in • How do we and/or
and/or Inuit Canada from determine what displacement
communities, on some France to is historically of different
significant events, Britain. significant? groups (see,
developments, and/or e.g., A2.4)
issues related to the
shift in power in
colonial Canada from
France to Britain
A3. describe various Historical The
significant people, Significance; significance of
events, and Cause and historical
developments, Consequence events is
including treaties, in determined
Canada between 1713 partly by their
and 1800, and explain short- and
their impact long-term
impact.
246

Strand B. Canada, 1800–1850: Conflict and Challenges
Related Sample Spatial
Concepts of Framing Skills/Activities to
Overall Expectations Big Ideas
Historical Questions Be Introduced/
Thinking Developed
B1. analyse aspects of Continuity Throughout • What can we Graphs
the lives of various and Change; Canadian learn from the • Analysing and/or
groups and Historical history, people ways in which constructing
communities, including Perspective have struggled people met graphs related
First Nations, Métis, and to meet challenges in to immigration
Inuit communities, in challenges and the past? to Canada (see,
Canada between 1800 to improve • Why is it e.g., B2.5)
and 1850, and compare their lives. important to Maps* and
them to the lives of consider Globes
people in Canada in various • Analysing and
1713–1800
perspectives constructing
when political maps to
analysing show alliances
events or (see, e.g., B2.4)
issues? • Analysing
demographic or
population maps
related to
settlement
patterns,
territorial
expansion (see,
e.g., B2.4)
247

B2. use the historical Historical The first half • What types of • Analysing and
inquiry process to Significance; of the forces can bring constructing flow
investigate Historical nineteenth about change? maps on
perspectives of Perspective century was movement
different groups and a time of patterns and/or
communities, major displacement of
including First Nations, conflict and different groups
Métis, and/or Inuit change in (see, e.g., B2.4)
communities, on some Canada.
significant events,
developments, and/or
issues that affected
Canada and/or people
in Canada between
1800 and 1850
B3. describe various Historical Social and
significant people, Significance; political
events, and Cause and conflicts and
developments, Consequence changes in
including treaties the first half
between Indigenous of the
nations and imperial nineteenth
powers, in Canada century have
between 1800 and had a lasting
1850, and explain impact on
their impact Canada.
* The term map refers to print, digital, and interactive maps. Students may analyse and create maps on
paper or using mapping programs.
248

Expectations by strand
A. New France and British North America, 1713–1800
Overall expectations
By the end of Grade 7, students will:
A1. Application: Colonial and Present-day Canada
analyse aspects of the experiences of various groups and communities, including First Nations, Métis,
and Inuit communities, in Canada between 1713 and 1800, and compare them to the lives of people in
present-day Canada (FOCUS ON: Continuity and Change; Historical Perspective)
Specific expectations
By the end of Grade 7, students will:
A1.1 analyse key similarities and differences in social values and aspects of life between people in
present-day Canada and some different groups and communities, including First Nations, Métis, and
Inuit communities, in Canada between 1713 and 1800 (e.g., with reference to gender roles, religious
practices, spirituality, ceremonies and rituals, living conditions, diet, recreation, and/or political rights;
attitudes towards slavery, social class, the role of women, and/or crime and punishment; attitudes of
newcomers/settlers and First Nations, Métis, and Inuit towards each other and towards the land)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What are the main differences between your life and the life of a child in Haudenosaunee
society or on a seigneurie in New France?
• What social attitudes permitted slavery to exist in colonial Canada?
• What did the presence of missionaries among First Nations during this period imply about the
social values of the colonizing peoples? In what ways have attitudes towards First Nations
peoples held by some non-Indigenous Canadians changed? In what ways have they stayed the
same?
• What were some central values and world views of Inuit in the eighteenth century? What are
some ways in which these values and world views are reflected in present-day Inuit
communities?
A1.2 analyse some of the main challenges facing various individuals, groups, and/or communities,
including First Nations, Métis, and Inuit individuals and/or communities, in Canada between 1713 and
1800 and ways in which people responded to those challenges (e.g., with reference to conflict arising
from imperial rivalries; climatic and environmental challenges; competition for land and resources
between European imperial powers and the consequences for Indigenous communities; the hard physical
labour and isolation associated with life in new settlements; disease; discrimination facing Black
Loyalists; restrictions on rights and freedoms of slaves, seigneurial tenants, or indentured workers), and
249

assess similarities and differences between some of these challenges and responses and those of people
in present-day Canada
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What were some of the environmental challenges facing people in early Canada? What
similarities do you see between these challenges and current environmental challenges facing
people in Canada today?
• In what ways are the lives of elderly people different now than they were in the past? What are
the main reasons for the differences?
• What challenges did the Mississaugas of the New Credit encounter as a result of encroachment
on and European occupation of their traditional territory? How did they respond to these
challenges? How would you compare this response to actions taken today in response to threats
to First Nations lands?
• What sort of care was available for sick people in eighteenth-century Canada? Why were
medicines of Indigenous origin so important at this time? Why are they still important today?
A1.3 analyse the displacement experienced by various groups and communities, including First Nations,
Métis, and Inuit communities, who were living in or who came to Canada between 1713 and 1800 (e.g.,
the expulsion of the Acadians; the forced relocation experienced by many First Nations and/or Métis to
reserves or different territories; the migration of Loyalists to various regions of Canada; the forced
migration of African slaves to New France and British North America; the immigration of people to
Canada seeking land, religious freedom, and/or work), and compare it with present-day examples of
displacement (e.g., the relocation of a First Nation reserve community in Canada as a result of changing
environmental or economic conditions; the experience of and services available to immigrants or
refugees to Canada)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What was the experience of different Loyalist groups? What challenges did these groups face?
Why did some Black Loyalists choose to return to Africa? Why did some Black Loyalists choose
to stay in Canada?
• In what ways would the experience of immigrants to colonial Canada have been different from
that of present-day immigrants to this country? What accounts for some of these differences?
• What was the experience of Inuit who were displaced by the commercial seal hunt that began in
Newfoundland in 1723? When analysing this displacement, whose perspectives should you
consider?
250

A2. Inquiry: From New France to British North America
use the historical inquiry process to investigate perspectives of different groups and communities,
including First Nations, Métis, and/or Inuit communities, on some significant events, developments,
and/or issues related to the shift in power in colonial Canada from France to Britain (FOCUS ON:
Historical Significance; Historical Perspective)
Specific expectations
By the end of Grade 7, students will:
A2.1 formulate questions to guide investigations into perspectives of different groups and communities,
including First Nations, Métis, and/or Inuit communities, on some significant events, developments,
and/or issues related to the shift in power in colonial Canada from France to Britain (e.g., the expulsion
of the Acadians; treaties and alliances among First Nations and between First Nations and European
nations, including the Treaty of Niagara, 1764; key battles in the North American colonies; legal and
territorial changes as a result of the Seven Years’ War; increased settlement by British immigrants;
challenges associated with Britain administering a colony with a French majority; the Constitutional Act,
1791; the creation of the North West Company and other fur trade companies; the Jay Treaty)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What groups were involved in the Battle of the Plains of Abraham? Why would each group have
viewed the conflict differently?
• Why was the Quebec Act passed? Who supported it? Who opposed it? Why?
• What questions arise when you examine the image of the Covenant Chain Wampum of 1764?
Which questions could you use to guide your investigation into different perspectives on this
treaty agreement?
• What questions arise when you examine the Métis sash?
• Why would French colonists, English colonists, and First Nations have had different views about
the arrival of the Loyalists?
• How did the shift in power from France to Britain affect First Nations and Métis people involved
in the fur trade? How did this shift in power affect First Nations and Métis people not involved in
the fur trade?
A2.2 gather and organize information and evidence about perspectives of different groups and
communities, including First Nations, Métis, and/or Inuit communities, on some significant events,
developments, and/or issues related to the shift in power in colonial Canada from France to Britain,
using a variety of primary sources(e.g., diaries, gravestone inscriptions, Indigenous oral histories,
archaeological evidence, wampum belts, material from online archives, paintings, petitions, speeches)
and secondary sources(e.g., poetry or songs written after this historical period, museum exhibits,
documentaries, online videos, historical fiction, monuments, web resources and/or books on Canadian
history)
251

Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• Why would the diaries and letters of expelled Acadians be a good source on their experiences
and perspectives? What sources could you consult to investigate the perspectives of other
groups on the expulsion?
• What are petitions? Whose perspectives would they reveal? How might you find out if there are
any petitions on the issue you are investigating?
• Where might you find information about the position of First Nations on the Peace and
Friendship Treaties?
• Are you finding the perspectives of First Nations, Métis, and/or Inuit in the primary and
secondary sources you are consulting? How can you ensure that your sources represent all
relevant perspectives, including those of First Nations, Métis, and/or Inuit?
• Do these sources reflect the perspectives of women, including Indigenous women?
A2.3 assess the credibility of sources and information relevant to their investigations (e.g., by
considering the perspective, bias, accuracy, authenticity, purpose, and/or context of the source and the
values and/or expertise of its author)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• If you were consulting websites for information on the Haldimand Proclamation of 1784, how
would you determine which sites are the most reliable and credible? Which perspectives do the
websites reflect?
• Why is it important to consult multiple sources when examining a historical event, issue, or
development?
A2.4 analyse and construct maps as part of their investigations into significant events, developments,
and/or issues related to the shift in power in colonial Canada from France to Britain, with a focus on
exploring their spatial boundaries (e.g., construct maps to show the location of various battles in North
America during the Seven Years’ War; analyse flow maps to show where groups, including Indigenous
communities, were displaced from and where they went; analyse population maps to determine changes
in settlement patterns and the groups, including Indigenous communities, that were affected)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What type of map could you use to show the routes taken by the Acadians after they were
expelled from the Maritime colonies?
252

• When you study maps of Canada before and after the Treaty of Paris, what do you notice about
changes in settlement trends? What do you notice about European settlement trends in First
Nations territories?
• What information would you need to include on a map to show the various alliances and
conflicts in North America during the Seven Years’ War?
• What do you notice when you analyse maps showing Métis migration patterns before and after
the establishment of the North West Company or the Hudson’s Bay Company?
A2.5 interpret and analyse information and evidence relevant to their investigations, using a variety of
tools (e.g., analyse paintings of key events in the Seven Years’ War to extract information and to
determine the perspective that is presented and the perspectives that are missing; analyse documents to
determine the response of people in New France, including First Nations and Métis people, to the
colony’s being ceded to Great Britain; use a graphic organizer to help them compare the perspectives of
French and English colonists and First Nations and Métis people on the division of the colony into Upper
and Lower Canada)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What tools might you use to help you analyse the evidence you have compiled?
• What do these paintings reveal about the subject? About the perspective of the artist? Given
the information you have found in your other sources, do you think the depiction in this painting
is accurate?
• What does your evidence suggest about the significance of the Battle of the Plains of Abraham
for colonists in New France? For First Nations allied to the French? For British colonists and the
colonial administration? Is there any group (or groups) whose perspective is missing from this
evidence? If so, why might that be?
A2.6 evaluate evidence and draw conclusions about perspectives of different groups and communities,
including First Nation, Métis, and/or Inuit communities, on some significant events, developments, or
issues related to the shift in power in colonial Canada from France to Britain
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What did you find out about how different individuals and groups in Quebec viewed the shift in
power to Britain?
• What have you learned from looking at this event from different perspectives? Do you think all
the perspectives are equally valid? Why or why not?
A2.7 communicate the results of their inquiries using appropriate vocabulary (e.g., perspective,
colony, treaty, expulsion, displacement, values, roles, power, conflict, Acadian, medicines, oral
histories, ethnogenesis) and formats appropriate for specific audiences (e.g., a historical narrative in
storybook or graphic form about the responses of different people to the expulsion of the Acadians;
253

a debate presenting differing perspectives on the battle of the Plains of Abraham; an information
poster on the Constitutional Act, 1791, including the response of different groups to the act; an
audiovisual presentation about the ways different groups viewed the Peace and Friendship Treaties)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• Which format is best suited to communicating the results of your inquiry in an engaging and
meaningful manner? Why?
A3. Understanding Historical Context: Events and Their Consequences
describe various significant people, events, and developments, including treaties, in Canada between
1713 and 1800, and explain their impact (FOCUS ON: Historical Significance; Cause and Consequence)
Specific expectations
By the end of Grade 7, students will:
A3.1 identify factors leading to some key events that occurred in and/or affected Canada between 1713
and 1800 (e.g., the expulsion of the Acadians, the Seven Years’ War, the Battle of the Plains of Abraham,
the American Revolution, Pontiac’s Resistance, Loyalist migrations), and describe the historical
significance of some of these events for different individuals, groups, and/or communities, including
Indigenous individuals and/or communities
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• Why did the British government expel the Acadians? Where did they go? Who took over their
lands? Who are the Cajuns? What is their connection to the Acadians?
• What were the underlying causes of the Seven Years’ War? Why is that war seen as a turning
point in North American history?
• What factors led to Pontiac’s Resistance? How successful was this resistance? Why is it
significant for First Nations?
A3.2 identify a few key treaties of relevance to Indigenous people during this period, including wampum
belts exchanged, and explain the significance of some of these agreements for different people and
communities in Canada (e.g., with reference to the Covenant Chain, 1677–1755; the Treaty of
Portsmouth, 1713; the Peace and Friendship Treaties, 1713–60; the Treaty of Niagara and the Covenant
Chain Wampum, 1764; the British-Inuit Peace Treaty, 1765; the Treaty of Fort Stanwix, 1784; the
Haldimand Proclamation, 1784; the Jay Treaty, 1794; the Treaty of Greenville, 1795)
254

Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• Who were the parties to the Treaty of Niagara or the 1760 Treaty of Peace and Friendship?
What were the key short-term and long-term consequences of the selected treaty for the
different parties?
• Who were treaty people in eighteenth-century Canada? What did it mean to be a treaty person
at that time?
• What treaty brought the Seven Years’ War to an end? What were the main stipulations in this
treaty? How did the treaty affect Indigenous individuals and communities?
A3.3 identify key political and legal changes that occurred in and/or affected Canada during this period
(e.g., the Royal Proclamation, 1763; the Treaty of Utrecht, 1713; the Quebec Act, 1774; the
Constitutional Act, 1791), and explain the impact of some of these changes on various individuals,
groups, and/or communities, including First Nations, Métis, and Inuit individuals and/or communities
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• In what ways was the Quebec Act a departure from earlier policy? What impact did it have?
• Why was the Constitutional Act of 1791 implemented? What impact did this act have on French
and English Canada? What impact did it have on Indigenous people?
• What key provisions from the Royal Proclamation of 1763 addressed the issue of title to
Indigenous land?
A3.4 identify key social and economic changes that occurred in and/or affected Canada during this
period (e.g., fur trade competition between the North West Company and the Hudson’s Bay Company,
Loyalist settlement, growth in agriculture and in the timber industry, the ethnogenesis of the Métis), and
explain the impact of some of these changes on various individuals, groups, and/or communities,
including First Nations, Métis, and/or Inuit individuals and communities
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What were some factors during this time that had an impact on the ethnogenesis of the Métis?
• What was the North West Company? How did its establishment change the fur trade? What
impact did these changes have on First Nations and Métis people and on French and British
traders?
• To whom does the term “country wives” refer? What impact did the policies of different fur
trade companies have on the role of “country wives”?
• What were some of the challenges facing Loyalists on their arrival in Canada? Did all Loyalists
face the same challenges?
255

A3.5 describe some significant aspects of daily life in various First Nations, Métis, and Inuit communities
in Canada during this period (e.g., with reference to housing, clothing, transportation, size of families,
gender roles, kinship ties, beliefs and values, celebrations, ceremonies and rituals, spiritual life)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• How did Indigenous peoples’ traditional knowledge of and their relationship with the land and
water affect aspects of daily life in their communities?
• What were some differences in the ways of life in two Indigenous communities in your local
area?
• How did Métis marriage customs acknowledge both First Nations and European ancestors?
A3.6 describe some significant aspects of daily life of different newcomer/settler groups living in Canada
during this period (e.g., with reference to seigneurs and habitants in New France; migrant fishers in
Newfoundland; European traders in less populated regions; Black Loyalists in Nova Scotia; militia, priests,
nuns, artisans, and/or labourers in Louisbourg or Quebec City; Acadian or Planter farm families in the
Annapolis Valley)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What would life have been like for young people your age living in an artisan’s family in New
France? Would they be in school? Would they be working? What might they have done in their
spare time?
• What were the day-to-day responsibilities of men, women, and children in a rural family in early
Upper Canada?
A3.7 describe significant interactions between various individuals, groups, and institutions in Canada
during this period (e.g., with reference to interactions affecting First Nations, Métis, Inuit, French and
English colonists, Acadians, Planters, Loyalists, slaves; the functions of, and interactions of people with,
the Catholic Church, Protestant churches, and/or the French and British colonial administrations)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What role did the Catholic Church play in the lives of colonists in New France? What roles did
the Catholic and Protestant churches play in the lives of First Nations and Métis people?
• What impact did rivalries among European powers have on the relations between French and
English colonists in Canada?
• What rivalries and alliances existed among Indigenous nations? Why were they significant?
256

• How would you describe relations between First Nations, Métis, and Loyalists in Upper Canada?
Between French settlers and Loyalists in Lower Canada? What role did pressures for land and
resources play in these relationships?
• What types of interactions did Inuit and First Nations in Newfoundland and Labrador have with
Europeans who worked in the commercial fishery and/or seal hunt?
A3.8 identify some significant individuals and groups in Canada during this period (e.g., Marie-Josèphe
Angélique, Michel Bégon, Esther Brandeau, Joseph Brant, Molly Brant, Cadotte, Alexander Mackenzie,
Pontiac, Elizabeth Simcoe, John Graves Simcoe, Thanadelthur; trappers and fur traders, Métis “country
wives”, missionaries, explorers, Loyalists, habitants), and explain their contribution to Canadian heritage
and/or identities
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What role did Métis people play in the fur trade?
• Who was Marie-Josèphe Angélique? What does her story tell us about Canada in this period?
• Why do we have a holiday named after John Graves Simcoe?
• Who was Thanadelthur? What were her contributions to Canada?
257

B. Canada, 1800–1850: Conflict and Challenges
Overall expectations
By the end of Grade 7, students will:
B1. Application: Changes and Challenges
analyse aspects of the lives of various groups and communities, including First Nations, Métis, and Inuit
communities, in Canada between 1800 and 1850, and compare them to the lives of people in Canada in
1713–1800 (FOCUS ON: Continuity and Change; Historical Perspective)
Specific expectations
By the end of Grade 7, students will:
B1.1 analyse social and political values and significant aspects of life for some different groups and
communities, including First Nations, Métis, and Inuit communities, in Canada between 1800 and 1850
(e.g., ways of life in British and French forts, in new settlements in the bush, on First Nations reserves;
living conditions for different classes in industrializing cities; attitudes towards Irish immigrants, African
Canadians, Métis, Inuit; attitudes of political elites and groups seeking political reform; gender roles in
First Nations, Métis, and Inuit communities), and assess similarities and differences between these
values and aspects of life and those in eighteenth-century Canada (e.g., with reference to improvements
in access to education; changes in attitudes towards slavery or political elites; changes resulting from
political reform; changes in ways of life of First Nations on reserves)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What social attitudes were reflected in the forced removal of First Nations and Métis
communities on the arrival of Loyalists or European immigrants?
• In what ways were the political values of Upper Canadian reformers different from those of
Canadian colonists in the eighteenth century? In what ways were they the same?
• What do William Parry’s writings reveal about British attitudes towards Inuit?
• How did the increasing presence of European women in fur trade communities affect “country
wives”? What does this development tell you about the social values of many newcomers with
respect to First Nations and Métis people?
• What did European settlers mean when they used the word “frontier“ to describe the West?
What attitudes or values did this term reflect? How did these attitudes, and the practices they
supported, affect First Nations and Métis people living in the West?
B1.2 analyse some of the challenges facing individuals, groups, and/or communities, including First
Nations, Métis, and Inuit individuals and/or communities, in Canada between 1800 and 1850 (e.g., war
with the United States, industrialization, poor wages and working conditions, rigid class structure, limited
political rights, discrimination and segregation, religious conflict, limited access to education, influx of
new immigrants, epidemics, transportation challenges, harshness of life in new settlements in the West,
258

continuing appropriation of First Nations, Métis, and Inuit land and resources by European settler
communities) and ways in which people responded to those challenges (e.g., strikes, rebellion,
resistance, legislation to expand access to education, treaties, construction of canals, mutual aid
societies, work bees, quarantining immigrants)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What were some of the challenges new immigrants faced on arriving in Canada? What were
some responses to those challenges?
• What were some of the methods used by Reformers and Patriotes in their quest for political
change?
• How did discrimination and segregation affect the ways in which African Canadians met their
everyday needs?
• What significance did a father’s fur trade company rank have for his Métis children?
• How did Inuit respond to the challenge of living in the Arctic? Why did they succeed in this
environment while members of the Franklin expedition did not?
B1.3 analyse the displacement experienced by various groups and communities, including Indigenous
communities, who were living in or who came to Canada between 1800 and 1850 (e.g., displacements
resulting from damage to property during the War of 1812 or the Rebellions of 1837–38; from the loss of
First Nations and Métis territory due to increasing encroachment and settlement by colonists; from
immigration of Europeans seeking land, religious freedom, and/or work) and how some of these groups
dealt with their displacement
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• Why did so many Irish immigrants come to Canada in the 1840s? What was their experience
aboard ship and upon arrival in Canada? How did people already living in Canada react to them?
• What were the responses of First Nations and Métis people to their displacement owing to
increasing encroachment on their traditional territories?
• How did the Métis people of Mackinac Island and Drummond Island respond to the
displacement that resulted from the redrawing of the Canada/U.S. border after the War of
1812?
B2. Inquiry: Perspectives in British North America
use the historical inquiry process to investigate perspectives of different groups and communities,
including First Nations, Métis, and/or Inuit communities, on some significant events, developments,
and/or issues that affected Canada and/or people in Canada between 1800 and 1850 (FOCUS ON:
Historical Significance; Historical Perspective)
259

Specific expectations
By the end of Grade 7, students will:
B2.1 formulate questions to guide investigations into perspectives of different groups and communities,
including First Nations, Métis, and/or Inuit communities, on some significant events, developments,
and/or issues that affected Canada and/or people in Canada between 1800 and 1850 (e.g., the War of
1812, cholera epidemics, increased immigration from Europe, heightened class divisions in Upper and
Lower Canada, the rise of the Patriotes in Lower Canada, the Battle of Saint-Eustache, the Battle of
Seven Oaks, the Mica Bay incident, education reform)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• Which questions might guide your investigation into the reaction of different groups, including
Indigenous peoples, to the call to arms in 1812?
• What questions might guide your investigation into the roles of Inuit in Arctic exploration during
this period?
• What view did members of the Family Compact have of William Lyon Mackenzie? Was their
view different from that of moderate Reformers?
• What view did different groups have of the increasing number of Irish immigrants in Upper and
Lower Canada?
B2.2 gather and organize information and evidence about perspectives of different groups and
communities, including First Nations, Métis, and/or Inuit communities, on some significant events,
developments, and/or issues that affected Canada and/or people in Canada during this period, using a
variety of primary sources (e.g., diaries, Indigenous oral histories, traditional songs, excerpts from books
that were popular at the time, newspaper editorials, paintings or drawings from that period, petitions,
speeches) and secondary sources (e.g., poetry, songs, paintings, or drawings from after this historical
period; museum exhibits; documentaries; online videos; historical fiction; web resources and/or books on
Canadian history)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• Would the letters of Richard Pierpoint be a reliable source on the living conditions and concerns
of African Canadians during this period? What sources could you consult to investigate other
perspectives?
• Where might you find information about the viewpoints of different individuals or groups on
political issues leading up to the Rebellion in Lower Canada?
• How and where could you search for primary sources on Indigenous perspectives on the War of
1812 and its aftermath?
260

• When you analyse this painting depicting life in the Arctic, what can you determine about the
perspective of the artist? What might this painting look like if it had been painted from an Inuit
perspective?
B2.3 assess the credibility of sources and information relevant to their investigations (e.g., by
considering the perspective, bias, accuracy, authenticity, purpose, and/or context of the source and the
values and/or expertise of its author)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• If you were consulting websites for information on the Pemmican Proclamation, how would you
determine which sites were the most reliable and credible?
• Who wrote this diary? What social, economic, or political position did this person hold? How
might this person’s position have affected his or her values or perspective? How might those
values affect the usefulness of this source?
B2.4 analyse and construct maps as part of their investigations into some significant events,
developments, and/or issues that affected Canada and/or people in Canada during this period, with a
focus on exploring their spatial boundaries (e.g., locate major battles of the War of 1812 or of the
Rebellions of 1837–38; construct flow maps to show where famine Irish were displaced from and where
they settled in Canada; analyse demographic maps to determine settlement patterns in Upper Canada
and how they affected First Nations and Métis people in the colony)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What types of maps might you use to gather information on immigrants entering Canada?
• When you examine this map, what do you notice about the location of the main battles of the
War of 1812?
• What types of information would you need to put on a map to illustrate encroachment by
newcomers/settlers on the lands of the Six Nations in the Haldimand area?
B2.5 interpret and analyse information and evidence relevant to their investigations, using a variety of
tools (e.g., use a graphic organizer to compare the perspectives of English and French Canadians on the
Durham Report; analyse the content of selected paintings to determine the perspectives that are
presented and the perspectives that are missing; use a graphic organizer to help them determine
similarities and differences in the perspective of various groups, communities, and/or individuals,
including Indigenous communities and individuals, on life outside colonial towns/cities; use graphs to
help them determine the increase in immigrants to the various colonies in British North America)
261

Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• Which type of organizer might be best suited to help you analyse various perspectives on the
Act of Union?
• What information would you need to plot on a Venn diagram to help you analyse similarities
and differences in the perspectives of the supporters of Mackenzie and Papineau?
• What does this newspaper editorial reveal about attitudes towards Irish Catholics in Upper
Canada?
• What type of graphic organizer might you use to help you determine whose perspectives are
present in and absent from these documents describing the impact of the War of 1812 on First
Nations and Métis families?
B2.6 evaluate evidence and draw conclusions about perspectives of different groups and communities,
including First Nations, Métis, and/or Inuit communities, on some significant events, developments, or
issues that affected Canada and/or people in Canada during this period
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What did you find out about the ways Métis and First Nations viewed the growth in settlement
in Upper Canada?
• What did you learn about differences in the ways various groups in Lower Canada viewed the
Rebellion of 1837? What accounts for the differences in perspective?
• What have you concluded about why some religious institutions in Canada felt the need to
establish residential schools? What evidence supports your conclusions?
B2.7 communicate the results of their inquiries using appropriate vocabulary (e.g., immigrant, rebels,
famine, Loyalist, Reformer, Patriote, British North America, Upper Canada, Lower Canada, Family
Compact, Château Clique, responsible government) and formats appropriate for specific audiences (e.g.,
a dual perspective poem or story on western settlement written from the points of view of settlers and
First Nations and/or Métis people; a dramatic presentation on the lives of immigrants from different
regions or classes; an annotated map explaining the impact of the Rebellions of 1837 on various groups;
a work of art depicting the various groups involved in an event along with a write-up explaining their
viewpoints)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What might be the most effective way to explain the different perspectives on this issue to your
audience?
262

B3. Understanding Historical Context: Events and Their Consequences
describe various significant people, events, and developments, including treaties between Indigenous
nations and imperial powers, in Canada between 1800 and 1850, and explain their impact (FOCUS ON:
Historical Significance; Cause and Consequence)
Specific expectations
By the end of Grade 7, students will:
B3.1 identify factors contributing to some key events and/or trends that occurred in and/or affected
Canada between 1800 and 1850 (e.g., the War of 1812, the Upper Canada Rebellion, the Battle of Saint-
Eustache, Irish immigration, establishment of the Underground Railroad, exploration by John Franklin or
David Thompson), and describe the historical significance of some of these events/trends for different
individuals, groups, and/or communities, including Indigenous individuals and/or communities
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What were the major causes of the War of 1812? What impact did the war have on Canadian
identities and communities?
• What were some of the factors that led to First Nations and Métis involvement in the War of
1812? What were the major consequences of their involvement?
• Why did Tecumseh support the British in the War of 1812?
• What were some of the key social, economic, and political issues that led to the Rebellions of
1837–38? What is the significance of the rebellions for Canadian political history?
• Why was the Battle of Saint-Eustache significant to French Canadians?
• What was the motivation for the Franklin expedition? What was the significance of this
expedition for Inuit communities? For the British?
• Who or what was most responsible for the genocide of the Beothuk?
B3.2 identify a few key treaties of relevance to Indigenous people during this period, including wampum
belts exchanged, and explain the significance of some of these agreements for different people and
communities in Canada (e.g., with reference to the Selkirk Treaty, 1817; the Huron Tract Treaty, 1827;
the Saugeen Treaty, 1836; the Mississaugas of New Credit Land Cession Agreements; the Manitoulin
Island Treaties, 1836 and 1862; the Robinson-Superior and Robinson-Huron Treaties, 1850)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What were the short-term and long-term consequences of being included or not being included
in the treaty process for First Nations? For the Métis? For Inuit?
263

B3.3 identify key political and legal changes that occurred in and/or affected Canada during this period
(e.g., alliances between First Nations and British forces during the War of 1812; the Treaty of Ghent,
1814; the Abolition of Slavery Act, 1833; the Durham Report; the Act of Union; responsible government;
the Common School Act, 1846; the Rebellion Losses Bill, 1849; the Sayer Trial, 1849), and explain the
impact of some of these changes on various individuals, groups, and/or communities, including First
Nations, Métis, and Inuit individuals and/or communities
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• In what ways did the Treaty of Ghent affect members of the militia in colonial Canada?
• Who did the Act of Union benefit?
• What impact did the expansion of the Hudson’s Bay Company monopoly to the Pacific coast
have on First Nations and Métis people? On European traders? On prospective western settlers?
• What were the intended and unintended consequences of the Pemmican Proclamation?
B3.4 identify key social and economic changes that occurred in and/or affected Canada during this
period (e.g., increasing immigration, the global recession of the 1830s, growing markets for lumber and
wheat, political reform movements in Upper and Lower Canada, the construction of canals and railway
lines, education reform, mining in Canada West, cholera and smallpox epidemics, the genocide of the
Beothuk in Newfoundland), and explain the impact of some of these changes on various individuals,
groups, and/or communities, including First Nations, Métis, and Inuit individuals and/or communities
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What impact did the economic downturn of the 1830s have on farmers in both Upper and
Lower Canada? What impact did it have on ports in the Maritimes?
• How did the merger of the Hudson’s Bay Company and the North West Company in 1821 affect
the way of life of Métis and First Nations communities?
• In what ways did the construction of canals benefit various people in the colonies?
• In what ways might the condition of roads have hurt the colonial economy?
B3.5 describe significant interactions between different groups and communities in Canada during this
period (e.g., French, English, First Nations, Métis, Inuit, Loyalists, African Canadians, Irish and Scottish
immigrants, different religious denominations, the Family Compact, the Château Clique, landowners,
servants)
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• Why was there so little interaction between Inuit and settlers/newcomers at this time?
264

• How did alliances during and after the War of 1812 affect land distribution between the
Algonquin and Haudenosaunee in the Ottawa region?
• How would you characterize French-English relations at the time of the Durham Report?
• Why was there conflict between Irish Catholics and Protestants in Upper Canada?
• How did alliances between First Nations and Métis groups shape the outcome of the Mica Bay
incident?
B3.6 identify some significant individuals and groups in Canada during this period (e.g., Robert Baldwin,
General Isaac Brock, Cuthbert Grant, Charles Ermatinger, Peter Jones, William Lyon Mackenzie, Grace
Marks, John Norton, Louis-Joseph Papineau, Richard Pierpoint, Peggy Pompadour, Louis Riel Sr., Laura
Secord, Shawnadithit, Tecumseh, Catharine Parr Traill; groups advocating responsible government or
public education; immigrant aid and other charitable organizations; the Family Compact and Château
Clique; groups such as Mennonites in Waterloo County or the Six Nations in the Grand River region of
Upper Canada), and explain their contribution to Canadian heritage and/or identities
Teacher supports
Sample Questions
• What was Chief Shingwauk’s vision, and why was it significant?
• What role did immigrants play in the settlement of Canada? What impact has that role had on
Canadian heritage/identities?
• Why is there a memorial at Grosse Île in Quebec? What does this memorial tell us about the
challenges immigrants faced at the time?
265