Self-Awareness
Self-Awareness: The ability to accurately recognize one’s emotions and thoughts and their influence on
behavior. This includes accurately assessing one’s strengths and limitations, and possessing a well-grounded
sense of confidence and optimism.
Ideally, educators integrate evidence-based Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) practices across all subject areas
to help students develop their social emotional skills or competencies. For the Self Awareness competency,
we’ve developed three learning goals, set measurable grade band benchmarks, identified sample activities for
each grade band and identified where select Minnesota Academic Standards connect to the benchmarks. The
sample activities are suggestions that educators can use to teach the benchmarks – the activities are not meant
to be complete lessons. The intent is for students to reach mastery of each benchmark by the end of the grade
range; however, teachers may want to revisit the earlier skills periodically.
Learning Goals:
1. Demonstrates an awareness and understanding of own emotions.
2. Demonstrates awareness of personal strengths, challenges, aspirations and cultural, linguistic, and
community assets.
3. Demonstrates awareness of personal rights and responsibilities.
1

Learning Goal 1
Demonstrates an awareness and understanding of own emotions.
Benchmarks, Sample Activities and Related Academic Standards by Grade Band
Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Kindergarten–Grade Recognize and label their Routinely talk about physical Art, 0.2.1, Create or
3 emotions and feelings. and emotional cues that tell make in a variety of
us how we’re feeling in contexts in the arts area
different situations and in age- using the artistic
appropriate ways. For foundations.
example, with younger
children say, “Some people
are happy when they have a
smile. Is that what you’re
feeling? How can you tell on
the inside you’re feeling
happy?” Recognize that not all
cultures express emotions in
similar ways.
Listen deeply to what students
say and reflect what you
heard about their feelings,
e.g., “When I hear the kinds of
things you’re saying, it sounds
like you’re feeling very
frustrated right now. Is that
what you’re feeling?”
Kindergarten–Grade Identify positive and Schoolwide reading of “How Art, 0.2.1, Create or
3 negative emotions. Full Is Your Bucket.” make in a variety of
contexts in the arts area
Listen deeply to what students
using the artistic
say and reflect what you
foundations.
heard about their feelings,
e.g., “It sounds like you’re
feeling very frustrated right
now…,” “It sounds like you’re
feeling very happy right
now…”
2

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Kindergarten–Grade Identify emotions related Throughout the day, ask Art, 0.2.1, Create or
3 to different situations or students to stop and identify make in a variety of
events. their emotion, asking why contexts in the arts area
they feel the way they do. using the artistic
foundations.
As part of discussing stories,
have students identify a time
when they may have had the
same feelings as a character.
Ask them to: discuss this in
small groups, draw a picture
or write simple sentences in
their journals to describe how
those situations caused them
to feel the way they did.
Grades 4–5 Develop more complex Students role play situations, Art, 4.2.1, Create or
vocabulary to which display variations in make in a variety of
communicate their intensity. contexts in the arts area
emotions and feelings. using the artistic
Provide vocabulary words
foundations.
such as thrilled, elated,
mournful, rejected, ELA, L4.6, Write opinion
disappointed or irate, and pieces on topics or texts,
have students practice using supporting a point of
those words in their writing. view with reasons and
information.
3

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 4–5 Distinguish degrees of Discuss with students the Art, 4.2.1, Create or
their own emotional basic emotions, and range of make in a variety of
intensity. intensity within those contexts in the arts area
emotions. using the artistic
foundations.
Have students create
“emotional thermometers”
and discuss vocabulary words
that fit at different levels, e.g.,
irritated versus irate. Refer to
the thermometers with the
whole class, e.g., before taking
a quiz or going on a field trip.
Independently check in with
them when they seem to need
support.
Grades 4–5 Recognize the connection Read an appropriate book for N/A
between their thoughts, recognizing emotions and
emotions, and behaviors. behaviors and discuss how it
impacts them.
As part of discussing stories,
have students identify a time
they may have had the same
thoughts or feelings as a
character and ask them to:
discuss this in small groups,
draw a picture, or write in
their journals to describe how
those situations caused them
to think and feel the way they
did.
4

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 4–5 Describe how they Demonstrate personal Art, 4.2.1, Create or
physically respond to awareness through active make in a variety of
emotion. play, mimicking animal and contexts in the arts area
character behaviors, noticing using the artistic
how their body responds foundations.
when they act out character
Art, 4.3.1, Perform or
emotions.
present in a variety of
Ask students to work in small contexts in the arts area
groups to describe how using the artistic
different emotions make them foundations.
feel physically. Or, have them
respond to simple journal
prompts that ask them to
reflect on how emotions make
them feel, such as, what does
it feel like physically when
you’re happy, sad, excited,
angry or nervous?
5

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 6–8 Recognize the During testing and other high- Arts, 6.2.1, Create or
importance of complex stress periods, lead class make in a variety of
emotions, such as an discussions about the contexts in the arts area
indicator of a situation importance of self-care, such using the artistic
that needs attention. as taking breaks, pacing foundations.
yourself, breathing deeply and
exercising. When students
face challenging situations in
math classes or with difficult
lab experiments, or they
appear to be under stress,
routinely ask questions that
help them identify their
feelings, such as, “how are
you feeling about this?”;
“What do you need to do to
handle this situation?”;
“What are you doing to take
care of yourself?”
Have students identify
moments where characters in
the literature they are reading
experience complex emotions.
Discuss what these emotions
are and why – using evidence
from the text and inference –
the character might be having
the emotions and what they
could do to resolve them.
6

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 6–8 Analyze their emotional In pairs or in small groups, ask N/A
states that contribute to students to share or reflect
or detract from their and write a response to
ability to problem-solve. journal prompts about a time
they had a problem, and how
emotions such as anxiety,
anger or fear may have made
it more difficult to solve the
problem. Make the point that
it’s easier to make a good
decision or solve a problem
when we’re calm.
Grades 6–8 Assess emotional In pairs or small groups, ask N/A
reactions in different students to share or to reflect
contexts, such as face-to- and write in response to
face or through journal prompts about how
electronic their emotions may be more
communication. or less strong in different
situations with other people,
e.g., face-to-face interactions,
phone conversations, in text
messages or other electronic
communication.
Grades 9–12 Distinguish emotions one In pairs, small groups, or N/A
holds from how others individually, ask students to
expect them to feel. reflect on journal prompts
about how others may expect
them to feel in certain
situations and how that may
be different from how they
actually feel.
7

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 9–12 Describe how external In pairs, small groups, or Arts, 9.2.1, Create or
events or internal individually, ask students to make in a variety of
thoughts can trigger reflect on journal prompts contexts in the arts area
multiple emotions. about how others may expect using the artistic
them to feel in certain foundations.
situations and how that may
be different from how they
actually feel.
In response to literature, ask
students to think about what
the author is thinking about or
responding to, and how it
appears to be triggering
multiple emotions in the
author at the same time.
Grades 9–12 Describe how changing Share a time as a teacher N/A
their interpretation of an when self-talk helped change
event, for example the way you felt about a
through self-talk, can situation, e.g., “I was
change how they feel frustrated because my friend
about it. hadn’t called me when she
said she would, but then I
reminded myself how busy
she was, and that it wasn’t
personal, and I calmed down.”
When students appear to be
experiencing emotions that
may interfere with their
progress, ask dialoguing
questions that help them
identify opportunities to use
self-talk to calm down, e.g., “I
can tell you’re angry about
what he did, but what could
you say to yourself to help you
calm down?” “What could you
say to yourself to remind
yourself that it’s important to
wait until you’re calm to
decide what to do?”
8

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 9–12 Self-reflect to assess When students appear to be Arts, 9.3.1, Perform or
whether the intensity of experiencing emotions that present in a variety of
their emotions “fit” a may interfere with their contexts in the arts area
given situation. progress, ask dialoguing using the artistic
questions that help them foundations.
identify opportunities to use
self-talk to calm down, e.g., “I
can tell you’re angry about
what he did, but what could
you say to yourself to help you
calm down?” “What could you
say to yourself to remind
yourself that it’s important to
wait until your calm to decide
what to do?”
Grades 9– 12 Understand that When discussing characters in Arts, 9.2.1, Create or
identities and heritage literature or historical figures make in a variety of
practices shape the way or leaders, ask students (in contexts in the arts area
one views, understands pair shares, small groups, or in using the artistic
and interprets emotions. individual responses to journal foundations.
prompts) to reflect on how
the character or figure’s
identity/heritage may have
shaped their views and how
they interpret their emotions.
How is this different from the
student’s experience?
Table 1 – Self-Awareness, Learning Goal 1: benchmarks, sample activities and related academic standards by grade band.
9

Learning Goal 2
Demonstrates awareness of personal strengths, challenges, aspirations and cultural, linguistic, and community
assets.
Benchmarks, Sample Activities and Related Academic Standards by Grade Band
Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Kindergarten–Grade Describe their personal Students create an “All About Common Core Math
3 qualities, such as likes Me” poster and post it in the Standards, SMP 4, Model
and dislikes, needs and hallway. with mathematics.
wants, strengths and
challenges.
Kindergarten–Grade Describe an activity/task In different tasks over time, Science, 2.1.1.2.1, Raise
3 in which they may need routinely ask students to think questions about the
help in order to be about when they need to ask natural world and seek
successful. for help, and who they can answers by making
ask. careful observations,
noting what happens
when you interact with
an object, and sharing
the answers with others.
Arts, 0.3.1, Perform or
present in a variety of
contexts in the arts area
using the artistic
foundations.
10

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Kindergarten–Grade Identify family, peer, Students complete an art Science, 3.1.3.2.2,
3 school, community, project to celebrate things Science and engineering
cultural, and linguistic they love about their family involves many kinds of
strengths. and community. work and engages men
and women of all ages
and backgrounds.
Social Studies, 2.4.2.4.2,
Describe how the culture
of a community reflects
the history, daily life or
beliefs of its people.
Grades 4–5 Describe the personal Students are presented with a Common Core Math
strengths and assets they community or school need, Standards, SMP 1, Make
possess that make them and students identify a sense of problems and
successful members of personal asset that would help persevere in solving
their school and address the need. them.
community.
Have students complete a Common Core Math
project to identify their own Standards, SMP 4, Model
personal interests or with mathematics.
strengths, through drawing a
Common Core Math
picture or writing brief
Standards, SMP 7, Look
answers on a worksheet to
for and make use of
share with a caregiver at
structure.
home or in peer pair share.
11

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 4–5 Identify and explore Ask students to identify their Art, 4.2.1, Create or
opportunities to develop own personal strengths and make in a variety of
skills and talents. weaknesses that they’d like to contexts in the arts area
work on in an art project or using the artistic
journal activity. foundations.
Routinely give students the Art, 4.3.1, Perform or
opportunity to reflect on what present in a variety of
they like to do and what contexts in the arts area
they’re good at. “I can tell you using the artistic
really liked the math/science foundations.
project we just did. Why do
you think you liked this
activity especially?”
Routinely give students the
opportunity to reflect on what
they like to read or what kinds
of stories or poems they
prefer and why. “Why do you
think you liked this story
especially?” or “Why do you
think you like reading these
kinds of books?”
Grades 4–5 Determine ways to use Help students identify a need Science, 5.1.3.2.1,
family, school and in the community and develop Describe how science
community resources to a project to address the need. and engineering
accomplish tasks. As part of the project, ask influence and are
students to brainstorm and influenced by local
execute ways of using family, traditions and beliefs.
school and community
resources to complete the
project.
12

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 6–8 Self-reflect to recognize Routinely provide authentic Common Core Math
their strengths to meet a feedback and ask questions Standards, SMP 8, Look
need and/or address a that help students reflect on for and express regularity
challenge. their own strengths and in repeated reasoning.
interests, e.g., “I can tell
Arts, 6.3.1, Perform or
you’re really enjoying this
present in a variety of
story. Can you tell me what
contexts in the arts area
about this is making you feel
using the artistic
so energized, motivated,
foundations.
happy?” or “I can tell you’re
really proud of how you did on
this project. Can you tell me
what about this you’re most
proud of?”
Grades 6–8 Analyze how their Administer a school to work N/A
personal qualities and survey.
temperaments influence
choices and successes.
Grades 6–8 Identify and enhance an Routinely provide authentic Arts, 6.3.1, Perform or
individual feedback, e.g., “You are really present in a variety of
affinity/interest group, good at X” or “I can tell you contexts in the arts area
such as an extracurricular really love X.” Encourage using the artistic
group or after school students to sign up for school foundations.
group. activities that will allow them
to develop their interests,
such as student council or an
after school club. “Where
Everybody Belongs” (WEB), is
a middle school
orientation/transition
program that welcomes sixth-
or seventh-graders and makes
them feel comfortable
throughout the first year of
their middle school
experience.
13

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 9–12 Evaluate strengths and Students complete a learning Common Core Math
challenges in relation to style inventory and discuss Standards, SMP 4, Model
achieving goals (personal, ways to leverage it. with mathematics.
academic and social).
Common Core Math
Standards, SMP 8, Look
for and express regularity
in repeated reasoning.
Arts, 9.3.1, Perform or
present in a variety of
contexts in the arts area
using the artistic
foundations.
Grades 9–12 Identify things about As part of social studies or N/A
themselves that they history class, read about
cannot change and historical figures who made a
devote their energy to difference in their community.
something they can Create a community service
change. project inspired by those
individuals, a project that is
based on a collective goal of
students, and help students
identify roles they can fill to
support the work.
Grades 9–12 Analyze how personal Encourage students to sign up Arts, 9.3.1, Perform or
qualities help to for school activities. present in a variety of
contribute to community contexts in the arts area
Ask students to respond to a
and family, based on using the artistic
journal prompt or essay
identified interests and foundations.
question that asks them to
strengths.
reflect on how their interests,
talents and skills contribute to
their family and community.
14

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 9–12 Examine the ways that Reflect on roles in activities N/A
one’s actions create and the strengths and
unjust imbalances in interests they bring to those
opportunity, access, teams or groups.
participation and success
Provide journal prompts or
for particular groups of
have students write an essay
students.
in response to a question that
asks them to reflect on
injustices in their community,
and how the actions of
different members of the
community – including
ourselves – may perpetuate
those injustices.
Table 2 – Self-Awareness, Learning Goal 2: benchmarks, sample activities and related academic standards by grade band.
15

Learning Goal 3
Demonstrates awareness of personal rights and responsibilities.
Benchmarks, Sample Activities and Related Academic Standards by Grade Band
Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Kindergarten–Grade Describe what it feels like Using school or classroom ELA, SLVML 3.7.d,
3 to feel safe and expectations, model and have Recognize safe practices
respected. children demonstrate in personal media
responsible use and care of communications.
their own and others’
belongings. Ask them how it
feels when everyone respects
each other and the classroom.
Establish school and
classroom expectations using
the rights and responsibilities
concept, e.g., “I have the
responsibility to play safely at
recess; I have the right to not
be injured while playing at
recess.”
Work with students to create
positively stated, simple rules
for the classroom. One
example is “we listen
respectfully when others are
speaking.”
16

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Kindergarten–Grade Explain positive and Engage students authentically ELA, SLVML 3.7.d,
3 negative consequences in decision- and choice- Recognize safe practices
for their choices and making on policies such as in personal media
actions. classroom rules, school codes communications.
of conduct, and bullying and
Social Studies, 3.2.1.1.1,
harassment policies and
Identify possible short-
reporting/investigation
and long-term
protocols.
consequences (costs and
Anytime students face a benefits) of different
choice or decision, ask choices.
dialoguing questions that help
them reflect on the
consequences for each of the
possible choices. For example,
“If we do that next, what will
happen?”
Kindergarten–Grade Demonstrate Using school or classroom N/A
3 responsibility in taking expectations, have children
care of their own demonstrate ways to assert
belongings. their right to feel respected by
adults and classmates.
Kindergarten–Grade Demonstrate Routinely provide authentic N/A
3 responsibility when using feedback and ask students
others’ belongings, e.g. dialoguing questions that
asking permission and encourage them to reflect on
taking care of the how demonstrating
belongings. responsibility is effective. E.g.,
“I saw the way you asked if
you could use her marker and
then returned it when you
were done. Do you think she’ll
be willing to let you use things
once in a while when you
need to in the future? Why?”
17

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 4–5 Define their role in Students create posters or Art, 4.3.1, Perform or
ensuring safety and drawings about safe and present in a variety of
respect for others. respectful environments, and contexts in the arts area
discuss the roles of students using the artistic
and adults. foundations.
Grades 4–5 Accepting positive or Use restorative circle Science, 4.3.4.1.1,
negative consequences processes to assert rights and Describe how the
of their own choices and responsibilities. methods people utilize to
actions. obtain and use water in
their homes and
communities can affect
water supply and quality.
Social Studies, 2.3.4.9.1,
Identify causes and
consequences of human
impact on the
environment and ways
that the environment
influences people.
Grades 4–5 Identify areas of personal Include “responsibility” as a ELA, SLVML 4.7.d,
responsibility. vocabulary word. Lead a Recognize safe practices
discussion about what in social and personal
personal responsibility means. media communications.
Ask students to reflect on
ELA, SLVML 5.7.d,
their personal responsibilities
Recognize ethical
in response to journal
standards and safe
prompts or in pair shares.
practices in social and
personal media
communications.
Science, 5.3.4.1.3,
Compare the impact of
individual decisions on
natural systems.
18

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 4–5 Explain the benefits of As part of a reflection – in N/A
being responsible to self response to journal prompts
and others. or in pair shares – ask
students to describe the
benefits of being responsible
to self and others.
Grades 6–8 Demonstrate how to Students write newspaper N/A
assert rights in a way that articles, journal entries or
respects the rights of create art showing personal
others. and community aspects of
safe and respectful
environments.
Students write newspaper
articles, journal entries or
create art to celebrate ways
they or others have asserted
their rights in a way that
respects the rights of others.
Grades 6–8 Analyze the short and Lead a discussion on the Science, 7.4.4.1.2,
long-term outcomes of difference between short- and Describe ways that
choices and behavior. long-term consequences. For human activities can
short term, focus on change the populations
immediate or today and communities in an
consequences. For long term, ecosystem.
focus on the effects a month
or year from now or beyond.
Anytime students face a
decision, ask dialoguing
questions that encourage
them to think about short-
and long-term consequences
of their choices. E.g., “What
will the outcomes of your
decision be, today? “How
might it affect you and your
goals this semester?”
19

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 6–8 Identify areas of control Students design a brochure N/A
one has over situations in detailing safety issues and
life. procedures regarding
common scenarios and
behaviors.
Grades 6–8 Defines their Students design a brochure N/A
responsibility for the detailing safety issues and
outcomes of safe, risky or procedures regarding
harmful behaviors. common scenarios and
behaviors.
Grades 9–12 Advocate for the rights of Use four-square diagram to N/A
self and others. discuss different scenarios and
analyze community rights and
responsibilities versus
personal rights and
responsibilities and how they
relate to each other. Apply
this exercise to current
events/issues as well as to
students’ personal goals.
Grades 9–12 Describe how taking Give students a chance to role Arts, 9.3.1, Perform or
personal responsibility play in situations where present in a variety of
can lead to success. students need to demonstrate contexts in the arts area
self-advocacy – with teachers, using the artistic
parents or in higher education foundations.
institutions.
Help students identify an area
of need in the community and
organize a community service
project. Celebrate completion
of the project, including how
they successfully took care of
their areas of responsibility.
20

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Grades 9–12 Realize the level of Ask students to write essays Science, 9.4.4.1.2,
control they have over about the things they can Describe the social,
their own lives and act improve in themselves and in economic and ecological
accordingly. their lives, and identify risks and benefits of
something they’d like to do. changing a natural
Help them organize self- ecosystem as a result of
improvement or community- human activity.
improvement projects.
21

Grades 9–12 Identify role(s) as a Engage students authentically ELA, SLVML 9.7.c,
responsible community in decision- and choice- Demonstrate an
member. making on policies such as understanding of ethics
classroom rules, school codes in mass communication
of conduct, and bullying and and describe the
harassment policies and characteristics of ethical
reporting/investigation and unethical behavior.
protocols.
ELA, SLVML 9.7.d,
Recognize ethical
standards and safe
practices in social and
personal media
communications, and
understand the
consequences of
personal choices.
ELA, SLVML 11.7.d,
Recognize ethical
standards and safe
practices in social and
personal media
communications, and
understand the
consequences of
personal choices.
Science, 9.4.4.1.3,
Describe contributions
from diverse cultures,
including Minnesota
American Indian tribes
and communities, to the
understanding of
interactions among
humans and living
systems.
Social Studies, 1.1.1.1.1,
Demonstrate ways good
citizens participate in the
civic life of their
community; explain why
participation is
important.
22

Grade Band Benchmark Sample Activity Related Academic
Standards
Social Studies, 4.1.4.6.2,
Identify the major roles
and responsibilities of
elected and appointed
leaders in the
community, state and
nation; name some
current leaders who
function in these roles
and how they are
selected.
Table 3 – Self-Awareness, Learning Goal 3: benchmarks, sample activities and related academic standards by grade band.
23