Responsible Decision-Making
Responsible Decision-Making: The ability to make constructive and respectful choices about personal behavior
and social interactions based on consideration of ethical standards, safety concerns, social norms, the realistic
evaluation of consequences of various actions, and the well-being of self and others.
It's important for students to develop good interpersonal skills that allow them to both collaborate with their
peers and communicate effectively with adults. It’s also vital that students learn how to make good decisions
autonomously. There are many ways to help students develop good decision-making skills. In the classroom, the
best way to foster this skill is to present students with choices in a variety of contexts. It’s important to create a
student-centered atmosphere where students feel their thoughts and opinions can be expressed and are valued.
Ideally, educators integrate evidence-based Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) practices across all subject areas
to help students develop their social emotional skills or competencies. For the Responsible Decision-Making
competency, we’ve developed two learning goals, set measurable grade band benchmarks, identified sample
activities for each grade band and identified where select Minnesota Academic Standards connect to the
benchmarks. The sample activities are suggestions that educators can use to teach the benchmarks – the
activities are not meant to be complete lessons. The intent is for students to reach S mastery of each benchmark
by the end of the grade range; however, teachers may want to revisit the earlier skills periodically.
Responsible Decision-Making Learning Goals
1. Considers ethical standards, social and community norms and safety concerns in making decisions.
2. Applies and evaluates decision-making skills to engage in a variety of situations.
1

Learning Goal 1
Considers ethical standards, social and community norms and safety concerns in making decisions.
Benchmarks, Sample Activities and Related Academic Standards by Grade Band
Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Kindergarten–Grade 3 Identify and follow As a class, develop N/A
shared bus, classroom simple, positively stated
and school norms. rules. Create a visual
reminder for students,
e.g., walk don’t run in the
hall; raise your hand to
speak; one person speaks
at a time. Post the rules
in high-traffic areas in
school.
Kindergarten–Grade 3 Identify and illustrate Teach “safe” and ELA, SLVML 3.7.d,
safe and unsafe “unsafe” as vocabulary Recognize safe practices
behaviors. words. Ask students to in personal media
work together as a class communications.
to decide if a list of
behaviors are “safe” or
“unsafe” (e.g., riding on a
bike path while wearing a
helmet; riding in a car
without wearing a
seatbelt; walking close to
the edge of a cliff;
crossing the street at a
crosswalk while holding
an adult’s hand).
2

Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Kindergarten–Grade 3 Understand that Play a game of night at Social Studies, 2.2.3.3.1,
decisions can have the museum, where Describe the trade-offs of
positive and negative students pretend to be a decision; describe the
effects on themselves statues in a museum. opportunity cost of a
and others. They don’t want to be choice as the next best
“caught” moving by the alternative which was
janitor’s flashlight. not chosen.
Debrief with questions
regarding decisions made
by players so they were
not “caught.”
Use story time to discuss
how characters made
decisions, and how their
decisions effected
themselves and others.
In social studies, read
biographies of leaders,
and discuss their
decisions and the effects
of the decisions on
others.
Grades 4–5 Contribute to school Work with students to N/A
safety by supporting create and enforce
classroom, lunchroom, simple, positively stated,
and playground shared shared classroom and
norms and rules. school community
norms.
3

Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Grades 4–5 Identify ways certain Use a decision-making Science, 5.3.4.1.3,
decisions or choices formula (e.g., stop and Compare the impact of
effect short- and long- calm down, identify the individual decisions on
term goals. decision to be made, natural systems.
identify the options,
research the
consequences of each
option, choose what’s
best for you, try it out,
and reflect on how well
the decision worked).
Grades 4–5 Identify positive and Consider the prompt “If I Science, 5.3.4.1.3,
negative consequences (the student) were the Compare the impact of
of decisions for oneself co-author of the individual decisions on
and others. rules/codes of conduct, natural systems.
what, if anything, would I
change in the rules?”
Ask students to write a
response to a journal
prompt, or create an art
project that shows a
decision and the positive
and negative
consequences for self
and others. Have
students share in small
groups.
Grades 6–8 Analyze the reasons for Use teachable moments, N/A
school rules and local including discipline, to
laws and identify the talk about the reasons
ethical values and social for school rules and local
norms they support. laws.
In response to a journal
prompt, ask students to
reflect on the reasons for
school rules or local laws.
4

Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Grades 6–8 Monitor how decision- Routinely ask students to Science, 6.1.2.1.1,
making affects progress reflect on how decision- Identify a common
toward achieving a goal, making affects progress engineered system and
through reflection on toward their goals (e.g., if evaluate its impact on
past choices, and social you decide to go to a the daily life of humans.
and community norms. sleepover tonight, how
will that affect your goal
of getting a good grade
on the test tomorrow?).
Ask how and why they
might do things
differently, if given the
chance.
Grades 6–8 Recognize the effect of Ask students to write in N/A
peer pressure on response to a journal
decision-making. prompt about how peer
pressure, including
perceptions about what
peers are thinking,
affects decision-making.
Use examples in
literature to discuss how
peer pressure, including
perceptions about what
peers are thinking, may
have influenced a
character’s decision.
5

Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Grades 9–12 Demonstrate ability to As part of vocabulary in ELA, SLVML 9.7.d,
consider personal ELA, or in social studies, Recognize ethical
responsibility, social discuss (and/or possibly standards and safe
norms, safety concerns do reports or respond to practices in social and
and ethical standards in journal prompts about) personal media
making decisions. the meaning of “personal communications, and
responsibility,” “ethics” understand the
and “norms.” consequences of
personal choices.
Assign reports that ask
students to learn about a Science, 9.1.3.3.1,
figure in history who Describe how values and
showed personal constraints affect science
responsibility and ethics. and engineering.
Ask how their sense of
Science, 9.1.1.1.5,
responsibility and ethics
Identify sources of bias
affected their decisions.
and explain how bias
Ask students to write might influence the
essays, in language arts direction of research and
or social studies, about the interpretation of
how they behave data.
responsibly and ethically.
Science, 9.1.1.1.4, Explain
When developing shared how societal and
classroom rules in any scientific ethics impact
class, discuss personal research practices.
responsibility, ethics and
norms, and how they
shape our behavior
toward one another.
Grades 9–12 Assess lessons learned Ask students to create a N/A
from past experiences visual map of a decision
and mistakes when they made, describe the
making decisions. outcome, and identify
potential areas for
improvement.
Table 1 – Responsible Decision-Making Skills, Learning Goal 1 – benchmarks, sample activities and related academic
standards by grade band.
6

Learning Goal 2
Applies and evaluates decision-making skills to engage in a variety of situations.
Benchmarks, Sample Activities and Related Academic Standards by Grade Band
Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Kindergarten–Grade 3 Implement "Stop, Think Show students a stop N/A
and Act" strategy when sign, explain what the
making decisions. stop sign means and
discuss how the stop sign
can be used in the
classroom–it can be used
as a prompt to stop and
think about their
behaviors before taking
action.
Routinely encourage
students to use “stop,
think and act” anytime
they face a choice or
decision.
Provide authentic
feedback when you
observe students making
good decisions.
7

Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Kindergarten–Grade 3 Demonstrate Create simple, positively Social Studies, 1.1.1.1.1,
cooperation with social shared expectations or Demonstrate ways good
and classroom norms and rules as a class to show citizens participate in the
procedures. students have a voice in civic life of their
the development and community; explain why
implementation of norms participation is
and procedures. important.
Social Studies, 3.1.1.1.1,
Identify ways people
make a difference in the
civic life of their
communities, state,
nation or world by
working as individuals or
groups to address a
specific problem or need.
ELA, SVLML 0.1, 1.1, 2.1,
3.1, Participate in
collaborative
conversations with
diverse partners about
grade-level topics and
texts with peers and
adults in small and larger
groups.
Kindergarten–Grade 3 Explain the Teach a vocabulary Social Studies, 2.2.3.3.1,
consequences and lesson on Describe the trade-offs of
rewards of actions on “consequences.” During a decision; describe the
self, other, or group. story time, routinely ask opportunity cost of a
students what the choice as the next best
consequences of a alternative which was
character’s decision not chosen.
were.
8

Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Grades 4–5 Identify a variety of Ask students to write in N/A
decisions/problems that response to a journal
students have at school. prompt, or work together
in pairs or small groups,
to identify decisions and
problems students face
at school, and effective
ways they might handle
them (i.e., options).
Grades 4–5 Generate alternative Ask students to ELA, SVLML 4.1.e, 5.1.e,
solutions to their brainstorm in small Cooperate and problem
identified problems. groups alternative solve, as appropriate, for
solutions to problems productive group
they face, individually, discussion.
and as a class.
Use examples from
literature to ask students
to generate alternative
solutions and/or
alternative choices a
character could have
made.
Use examples from
history to ask students to
generate alternative
solutions and/or
alternative choices a
historical figure could
have made, and how it
might have affected
events.
9

Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Grades 4–5 Assess consequences of Establish a decision- Science, 4.1.2.1.1,
possible solutions for the making formula for the Describe the positive and
identified problems and class (stop and calm negative impacts that the
demonstrate methods down, identify the designed world has on
for reaching consensus or problem or choice, the natural world as
a decision. consider the alternatives, more and more
choose, try it out). engineered products and
services are created and
Routinely encourage
used.
students to practice their
decision-making formula,
anytime they face a
decision.
Routinely ask students
about the options and
consequences of each,
anytime they face a
choice or decision.
Provide students with
authentic feedback
anytime they are working
through a decision.
Grades 4–5 Evaluate the results of Give students authentic Science, 5.3.4.1.3,
their actions after making feedback that helps Compare the impact of
a decision. connect their good individual decisions on
decisions to positive natural systems.
consequences for their
learning, the classroom
community, etc.
10

Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Grades 6–8 Identify and apply the Ask students to use Social Studies, 4.1.1.1.1,
steps of systematic creative art expression to Describe how people
decision-making, using identify an area of take action to influence a
creativity and innovation. decision-making. decision on a specific
issue; explain how local,
Ask students to respond
state, national or tribal
to journal prompt that
governments have
asks them to identify a
addressed that issue.
time they have applied
the decision-making Social Studies, 4.2.1.1.1,
formula and how it Apply a reasoned
worked. decision-making process
to make a choice.
Social Studies, 5.2.1.1.1,
Apply a decision-making
process to identify an
alternative choice that
could have been made
for a historical event;
explain the probable
impact of that choice.
Social Studies, 7.2.1.1.1,
Apply reasoned decision-
making techniques in
making choices; explain
why different households
or groups faced with the
same alternatives might
make different choices.
Social Studies, 8.2.1.1.1,
Apply reasoned decision-
making techniques in
making choices; explain
why different
governments faced with
the same alternatives
might make different
choices.
11

Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Grades 6–8 Gather additional Students complete a Science, 7.1.1.2.4,
information from project where they Evaluate explanations
multiple sources to actively seek outside proposed by others by
generate alternative sources of information to examining and
solutions. inform decision-making. comparing evidence,
identifying faulty
Routinely encourage
reasoning, and
students to explore and
suggesting alternative
research the likely
explanations.
outcomes of any choice,
anytime they face a ELA, W 6.7, 7.7, 8.7,
choice or decision. Write arguments to
support claims with clear
reasons and relevant
evidence.
Grades 6–8 Discuss alternatives in Routinely encourage N/A
relation to multiple students to explore and
contextual factors. research the likely
outcomes of any choice,
anytime they face a
choice or decision.
Give students authentic
feedback that helps
connect their good
decisions to positive
consequences for their
learning, the classroom
community, etc.
12

Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Grades 6–8 Analyze how decision- Create, agree to, and N/A
making skills affect study help students understand
habits and academic logical consequences,
performance. discussing them
frequently.
Routinely encourage
students to think about
and discuss how
decision-making affects
their academic
performance and study
habits.
Grades 9–12 Regularly demonstrate Read current events and Science, 9.1.1.2.1,
use of systematic discuss how a decisions Formulate a testable
decision-making, by was made and evaluate hypothesis, design and
identifying a decision, the quality of the conduct an experiment
gathering information, decision against a clearly to test the hypothesis,
and assessing alternative defined criteria (e.g., did analyze the data,
resolutions. the individual appear to consider alternative
follow a good decision- explanations, and draw
making strategy?). conclusions supported by
evidence from the
investigation.
13

Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Grades 9–12 Identify and ask Routinely encourage Science, 9.1.1.2.2,
systematic questions that students to seek Evaluate the
clarify various points of additional information, explanations proposed
view and lead to the best anytime they face a by others by examining
solution. decision. and comparing evidence,
identifying faulty
Provide authentic
reasoning, pointing out
feedback about the
statements that go
process they use to arrive
beyond the scientifically
at the best solution,
acceptable evidence, and
anytime they face a
suggesting alternative
decision.
scientific evidence.
ELA, SVLML 9.1 and 11.1,
Initiate and participate
effectively in a range of
collaborative discussions
(one-on-one, in groups,
and teacher-led) with
diverse partners on
grade-level topics, texts,
and issues, including
those by and about
Minnesota American
Indians, building on
others’ ideas and
expressing their own
clearly and persuasively.
ELA, W 9.7 and 11.7,
Write arguments to
support claims in an
analysis of substantive
topics or texts, using
valid reasoning and
relevant and sufficient
evidence.
14

Grade Band Benchmarks Sample Activities Related Academic
Standards
Grades 9–12 Analyze and evaluate Ask students to connect Science, 9.1.1.2.3,
evidence, arguments, their academic Identify the critical
claims, and beliefs to progression with future assumptions and logic
inform effective life goals. used in a line of
decisions. reasoning to judge the
Routinely encourage
validity of a claim.
students to seek
additional information ELA, W 9.7, and 11.7,
and evaluate all options, Write arguments to
anytime they face a support claims in an
decision. analysis of substantive
topics or texts, using
Provide authentic
valid reasoning and
feedback about the
relevant and sufficient
process they use to arrive
evidence.
at the best solution,
anytime they face a ELA, RI 9.8, Delineate and
decision. evaluate the argument
and specific claims in a
text, assessing whether
the reasoning is valid and
the evidence is relevant
and sufficient; identify
false statements and
fallacious reasoning.
Grades 9–12 Analyze how their Provide planners for Science, 9.1.3.2.2,
present decision-making students to list their Analyze possible careers
affects college and career goals and set deadlines in science and
choices. for accomplishing those engineering in terms of
goals and completing education requirements,
projects. working practices and
rewards.
Ask students to write
essays or respond to
journal prompts about
their college and career
goals. Ask students to
analyze how their current
decision-making affects
their progress toward
achieving those goals.
15

Table 2 – Responsible Decision-making Skills, Learning Goal 2 – benchmarks, sample activities and related academic
standards by grade band.
16